# Academic Blog

# Humanities as Interpretive Data

## Introduction:
I completely agree that the outdated idea of using externally-produced data sets, should be stripped from the digital humanities. I think Ramsay and Drucker had it right when they expressed their ideas and implications that graphs should express more than raw data in this field of study. We are meant to be studying people, and culture, and subjective information. Scientists deal in raw data and numbers, but we are concerned with the actual implications of that kind of information. Numbers have their place, and it is our job to make real use of those numbers in regards of putting forward ideas to fix problem spaces developed by the information we find.

## Digging deeper: My thoughts.
Studying digital humanities implies we are meant to be forward thinking and not recursive in simply collecting data and presenting it. It does nothing to simply present raw data in a simple bar graph, not when we want to know what that data can mean subjectively. I don’t care about how many books were read in a specific region of Canada, and it’s not enough to know what the books are, I need to know the content of the books and potential reasons that specific kind of book is being read so much. The goal is to learn the specifics of speculative data, things we try to guess, but won’t know unless tests are put forth to try to bring new data to light, and even then there can always be a deeper hole we can dig down to find more. Putting this information to use is the hard part, but is also the most rewarding part of the digital humanities. If I wanted to present empirical findings, I would have gone into sciences. Subjective data is the true home of digital scholarship, people like to think that the “digital” part of digital scholarship implies some kind of empirical law that nothing can be subjective, but that is wholesale false. Everything digital is completely subjective because at its core the things we are studying are always interactive, even if only visually.

## Digital Humanities Debates: Why Interpitive Data

“Most digital humanists do not employ the qualitative methods of data gathering to which Borgman refers, such as survey research, observations, and interviews” (, and this needs to change. Interpretation of information is one of the most valuable kinds of information we can gather as it is. Every article, every blog post, or academic paper is an interpretation of data sets more or less. A bigger question than should we change how we interpret and gather information as digital humanists is why we should change in the first place. It is believed in most academia, that any kind of information not founded in raw numbers and data sets, is not reliable information. Try as we might, we cannot collect all significant data via raw data sets, nor should we rely solely on externally gathered data sets as the only information we can work within. The study of the humanities is one based in assumptions. Assumptions are our reliable data.

As digital humanists we study humanities in digital capacities such as the interactions of people through digital mediums and social platforms. We can gather data on such interactions, but simply looking at the numbers without and inquisitive nature of assumption, we cannot ascertain information necessarily relevant to our concerns.To look at a specific tool, it would be prudent to take a look towards streaming platforms such as Twitch, that share an online community of broadcasters and audience members that all interact with on another. Data based on broadcasters, and audience interaction is interesting, and yet only lightly gathered. Digital humanists have look at mainstream media trends and data sets, and later have interpreted that data to discover findings on what people wish to see in their media. This research will continue into the newer forms of media, and likely already have, but the assumptions made have yet to be made abundant in interpretive data sets. The interactions between humans is one of the hardest pieces or kinds of information to track, as humans, whilst in some cases can be predictable, can also be the hardest to predict. People’s consumption of media has also been considered hard to track at what time people will consume media, and then for what reason. To this extent, assumptions must be made with people so we can “fill in the blanks” so to speak, with data collected based on this info. For example, if someone is watching modern forms of media, such as youtube or Twitch, because they either don’t television and traditional forms of media, or they might be traveling quite often and prefer more mobile media forms, or they for other reasons only have access to these forms. These are all guesses that to find accurate data on, we have to make the assumptions first that these are possibilities to then be able to poll for information and develop internal data sets within the digital humanities. Qualitative data based on quantitative data like viewer counts, or members in a digital community, is the information that really matters in the digital humanities, as we are not simply another science, with hard numbers, and are instead a cross between the humanities of the traditional sense and technology of the modern day and future. To this end our goals have to be to master the gathering of humanistic information on digital mediums, and the human interaction thereof, we have an ever changing online community that needs to be analyzed and interpreted to better create a more stable digital landscape for the future of industry and society as we have come to know.

I believe interpreted information is the future, and is the tool necessary to poll information of the age of technology’s society. The digital society we have built will only thrive based on accurate and informing data founded in a humanist basis that we can see into the minds and daily lives of people with. Humanists have been doing this for years, and as digital humanists we have the tools and the environment to take it even further.


## Moretti, Ramsay, and Drucker

“The abandonment of interpretation in favor of a naïve approach to statistical certainly skews the game from the outset in favor of a belief that data is intrinsically quantitative — self-evident, value neutral, and observer-independent”, and this belief hurts the humanities. We should be looking at all data, as qualitative. All data needs to be flipped on its head to create the ability to find information where there previously might not have been obvious information. Drucker's article is a great piece to look at to find these examples. Her graphs display obvious signs that there was non-obvious information to display that traditional data sets could not portray. Drucker is to be taken with a grain of salt as we should not stray so far down the line of qualitative data sets that we lose reliable data. Reliable data still exists within qualitative context, but we are simply able to extract analysis based assumptions via interpretive graphs, such as those throughout Drucker’s article.

# Voyant Visualization

<!--	Exported from Voyant Tools (voyant-tools.org).
The iframe src attribute below uses a relative protocol to better function with both
http and https sites, but if you're embedding this into a local web page (file protocol)
you should add an explicit protocol (https if you're using voyant-tools.org, otherwise
it depends on this server.
Feel free to change the height and width values or other styling below: -->
<iframe style='width: 720px; height: 600px;' src='//voyant-tools.org/tool/Bubbles/?view=Trends&docIndex=2&speed=60&corpus=21d23fee4ac7ad02ebfbdcbcba3ce54f'></iframe>

Through this visualization you can take a look at three articles, that being Moretti’s piece on abstract models, drucker’s article, and Ramsay’s article. This allows you to take a peek at the common words associated with each piece as the program goes through the reading. This shows how quickly spark words in say Moretti’s piece such as “scientific, algorithmic, and analysis” show up, and how often. Briefly analysing these words and making some quick assumptions, it’s easy to see the quantitative nature of Moretti’s article. How he is concerned with scientific analysis, and from knowing about the article in that he is looking at texts and how to extrapolate data from large bodies of text, without the need of close readings, we are also able to assume that despite the hypocritical nature of the statement. Moretti is trying to extrapolate qualitative data, from quantitative data, despite the fact that he still tries to paint it as science.

Moretti is so concerned with making sure his information is reliable by providing the scientific background, that in the end his piece is really lost in the numbers, and loses its humanities home ground. I think his piece could have meant more to the digital humanities world had he taken the time to really make statements in the implications the data could mean in the long run. He definitely contributed a great amount of thought, but we need to be asking ourselves how much the humanities really values the school of data, over the school of thought.

## Closing Thoughts.

I want to pose a statement in the form of an observation. The humanities encompases many different studies, one being philosophy, and our digital humanities, absolutely brings its own breed of philosophical thought. We cannot base philosophy on science, and if we are to consider the digital humanities to have philosophy under its umbrella, we should also believe that other fields within the digital humanities need to be met with the same values and schools of thought, of the philosophical or interpretive mind, which derives itself from the value of assumption.

### Thank you for reading.

## Bibliography:

Tanya E. Clement (2016). Where Is Methodology in Digital Humanities? Debates in the Digital Humanities,   http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/65

Drucker, J. (2015). Graphical Approaches to the Digital Humanities. A New Companion to Digital Humanities, 238-250.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html

Ramsay, S. (2011). Reading Machines. 1-17. http://sites.uci.edu/digitalhumanitiesreadinggroup/files/2016/02/stephen-ramsay-reading-machines-toward-an-algorithmic-criticism.pdf

Moretti, F. Graphs, Maps, trees. 67-91. https://www.mat.ucsb.edu/~g.legrady/academic/courses/09w259/Moretti_graphs.pdf
